=================
pygccxml download
=================

.. contents:: Table of contents

-------------------------
pygccxml on SourceForge
-------------------------

`pygccxml`_ project is hosted on SourceForge. Using SourceForge services you
can:

1) get access to source code
2) get access to latest release version of `pygccxml`_


-----------------
Subversion access
-----------------

http://sourceforge.net/svn/?group_id=118209

--------
Download
--------

https://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=118209

------------
Installation
------------

GCC-XML
-------
There are few different ways to install GCC-XML on your system:

1. If you use Linux, than I am almost sure your system has "gccxml" package.
   Consider to install it using "native"(rpm, deb, portage) packaging system. 

.. line separator

2. Another option is to install it from the source code. See `instructions`_ 
   provided by Brad King, the author of `GCC-XML`_. Installation from sources
   is supported for Windows, Linux and Mac platforms. 

.. _`instructions` : http://gccxml.org/HTML/Install.html

3. You can use `GCC-XML`_ installer created by me. Go to `download page`_ and get
   `"gccxml_installer.zip"`_ file. You will find installation instructions within 
   the file. The setup is basically small Python script, which installs `GCC-XML`_ 
   to the specified directory. It works pretty well for me on Linux and Windows. 
   You don't have to download CMake build system or anything else.

.. _`download page` : http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=118209&package_id=146545
.. _`"gccxml_installer.zip"` : http://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=118209&package_id=146545

pygccxml
--------
In command prompt or shell change current directory to be "pygccxml-X.Y.Z".
"X.Y.Z" is version of `pygccxml`_. Type next command:

| ``python setup.py install``

After this command complete, you should have installed `pygccxml`_ package.

------------
Dependencies
------------

* `GCC-XML`_

.. _`pygccxml` : ./../pygccxml/pygccxml.html
.. _`GCC-XML`: http://www.gccxml.org
