=================
pygccxml package
=================

.. meta::
   :description: C++ declarations parser
   :keywords: C++, source code, header file, parser, UML, free, declarations
              , XML, class hierarchy, analyze, AST, code generator,
              , синтаксический анализатор, исходный текст, исходная программа
              , описание, определение, иерархия классов, генератор кода

------------
Introduction
------------
.. include:: ./definition.irest

------------------------
What can you do with it?
------------------------
Using `pygccxml` you can:

* parse C++ source code
* create a powerful code generator

  + :doc:`Py++ <../pyplusplus/pyplusplus>` is heavily based on `pygccxml`
  + generate `WSDL`_ file from sources
  + ...

* generate UML diagrams
* build code analyzer
* ...

--------
Features
--------

Query interface
---------------
`pygccxml` provides simple and powerful API to query declarations tree.

How many lines is needed to write the following query?
::

  select all free functions from the project
  where
      name equal to "do_smth"
      return type is void
      function has two arguments
      second argument type is int

Only single line of code is needed:

.. code-block:: python

  #global_ns is the reference to declarations, which describes global( :: ) namespace
  global_ns.free_functions( "do_smth", return_type='void', arg_types=[None,'int'] )

``None`` means "any type". In my opinion, the code is pretty clear and readable.

If you want to know more about provided API read :doc:`query interface <query_interface>`
document or :doc:`API documentation <apidocs/api>`

Type traits
-----------
`pygccxml` provides a lot of functionality to analyze C++ types and relationship
between them. For more information please refer to :doc:`design <design>` document or API
documentation. Just a few names of algorithms:

* ``is_convertible( from, to )``

  returns ``True`` if there is a conversion from type ``from`` to type ``to``,
  otherwise ``False``

* ``is_unary_operator( oper )``

  returns ``True`` if ``oper`` describes unary operator


Declaration dependencies
------------------------
You can query a declaration, about it dependencies - declarations it depends on.
This is very powerful and useful feature. :doc:`Py++ <../pyplusplus/pyplusplus>`, for example, uses this
functionality to check that user creates Python bindings for all relevant
declarations.

Caching
-------
Consider the following situation: you have to parse the same set of files every
day. There are 2 possible ways to complete the task:

* create a header file that includes all files you need to parse

* parse each file separately and then join the results

The difference between these approaches is the caching algorithm used in the
second case. `pygccxml` supports both of them. Actually `pygccxml` supports
more caching strategies, read the API documentation for more information.

Binary files parser
-------------------
`pygccxml` contains functionality which allows to extract different information
from binary files ( `.map`, `.dll`, `.so` ) and integrate it with the existing
declarations tree.


-------
License
-------

`Boost Software License`_.

----------------
Test environment
----------------

`pygccxml` comes with comprehensive unit tests. They are executed on Windows XP
and `Ubuntu`_ Linux operating systems. All in all, `pygccxml` has more than 230 tests.
I am using Python 2.6 to run tests against.

Support for Python 2.4 was dropped.

-------------------------------
Documentation contents
-------------------------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   download.rest
   query_interface.rest
   design.rest
   upgrade_issues.rest
   example/example.rest
   users.rest
   links.rest
   history/history.rest
   apidocs/api.rest

.. _`WSDL`: http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl
.. _`SourceForge`: http://sourceforge.net/index.php
.. _`Docutils`: http://docutils.sourceforge.net
.. _`Python`: http://www.python.org
.. _`GCC-XML`: http://www.gccxml.org
.. _`Boost Software License`: http://boost.org/more/license_info.html
.. _`Ubuntu`: http://www.ubuntu.com/
.. _`boost::type_traits` : http://www.boost.org/libs/type_traits/index.html
