===================
Development history
===================

------------
Contributors
------------

Thanks to all the people that have contributed patches, bug reports and suggestions:

* My wife - Yulia
* John Pallister
* Matthias Baas
* Allen Bierbaum
* Georgiy Dernovoy
* Darren Garnier
* Gottfried Ganssauge
* Gaetan Lehmann
* Martin Preisler
* Miguel Lobo
* Jeremy Sanders
* Ben Schleimer
* Gustavo Carneiro

-----------
SVN Version
-----------

1. Experimental back-ends based on ``.pdb`` and ``.bsc`` files were removed.

2. Ability to extract different information from binary files ( ``.pdb``, ``.so``,
   ``.map`` ) and merge it with a declarations tree was added.

3. Ability to load `GCC-XML`_ configuration from ``.ini`` like file was added.
   See :func:`pygccxml.parser.config.load_gccxml_configuration` for details.

4. From now on, :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` will use `Sphinx <http://sphinx.pocoo.org/>`_
   for all documentation. The documentation format and content were updated.

5. From now on, `pygccxml` will provide convenient setup for latest `GCC-XML`_
   version (CVS). See :doc:`download <../download>` document.

6. Bug `[ 2431993 ] pygccxml parses const volatile variable args as just const <http://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=2431993&group_id=118209&atid=684318>`_
   was fixed.

7. Bug `[ 2779781 ] pygccxml reverses array dimensions <https://sourceforge.net/tracker/index.php?func=detail&aid=2779781&group_id=118209&atid=684318>`_
   was fixed.


-----------
Version 1.0
-----------

1. Support for ellipsis was added.

   Warning: this feature introduce backward compatibility problem!

   Description:

   .. code-block:: c++

      void do_smth( int, ... )

   Before this change, pygccxml would report that the function ``do_smth`` has
   only one argument.

   After this change, pygccxml will report that the function has two arguments.
   The second argument type will be ``declarations.ellipsis_t``. All classes,
   which describe callables, have new property ``has_ellipsis``. It the value of
   the property is ``True``, than the function has ellipsis in its definition.

2. New experimental back-end, based on ``.pdb`` (progam database file), was added.

3. New high-level API wrapper for ``.bsc`` (browse source code file) was added.

4. The recomended `GCC-XML`_ version to use with this release is CVS revision 123.
   This revision introduces small, but very important feature. `GCC-XML`_
   started to dump artificial declarations (constructor, destructor, operator=).
   ``pygccxml.declarations.type_traits`` functions were updated to use the new
   information.

5. ``declarations.decl_printer_t`` class dumps almost all available information
   about a declaration.

6. ``declarations.is_same_function`` was fixed and now it treats
   "covariant returns" right.

7. Search algorithm was improved for template instantiated classes. From
   now, a spaces within the class name doesn't matter.

8. pygccxml unit tests functionality was improved. Many thanks to Gustavo Carneiro.

-------------
Version 0.9.5
-------------

1. Class ``free_operator_t`` is now able to provide references to the class declarations
   instances it works on.

2. Support for `GCC-XML attributes`_ was added. Many thanks to Miguel Lobo for
   the implementation.

.. _`GCC-XML attributes`: http://www.gccxml.org/HTML/Running.html

3. A bug in parsing a function exception specification was fixed. Many thanks to
   Jeremy Sanders.

4. Support for a type/class "align", "offset" and "size" was added. Many thanks to
   Ben Schleimer for the implementation.

5. Support for GCC-XML 0.9 was added.

6. Support for ``__restrict__`` was added.

7. ``declarations.has_trivial_copy`` was renamed to ``declarations.has_copy_constructor``.
   The old name is still available, but will be removed soon.

8. ``declarations.priority_queue`` was renamed to ``declarations.priority_queue_traits``.

9. ``declarations.find_container_traits`` function was added.

10. Support for "partial name" was added. "Partial name" is the class name, without
    template default arguments. The functionality was added to std containers
    classes.

11. ``declarations.class_t`` and ``declarations.class_declaration_t`` has new property -
    ``container_traits``. This property describes std container element class.

12. All logging is now done to ``stderr`` instead of ``stdout``.

-------------
Version 0.9.0
-------------

1. Performance was improved. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` is now 30-50% faster. The improvement
   was achieved by using `cElementTree`_ package, ``iterparse`` functionality,
   instead of standard XML SAX API. If `cElementTree`_ package is not available,
   the built-in XML SAX package is used.

.. _`cElementTree` : http://effbot.org/zone/celementtree.htm

2. ``is_base_and_derived`` function was changed. The second argument could be
   a tuple, which contains classes. The function returns ``True`` if at least one
   class derives from the base one.

.. line separator

3. Class ``calldef_t`` has property - ``does_throw``. It describes
   whether the function throws any exception or not.

.. line separator

4. Bug fixes: small bug was fixed in functionality that corrects GCC-XML reported
   function default arguments. Reference to "enum" declaration extracted properly.
   Many thanks to Martin Preisler for reporting the bug.

.. line separator

5. New type traits have been added:


   * ``is_std_ostream``
   * ``is_std_wostream``

.. line separator

6. C++ does not define implicit conversion between an integral type and ``void*``.
   ``declarations.is_convertible`` type traits was fixed.

.. line separator

7. ``declarations.is_noncopyable`` type traits implementation was slightly changed.
   Now it checks explicitly that class has:

   * default constructor
   * copy constructor
   * ``operator=``
   * destructor

   If all listed functions exist, than the algorithm returns ``False``, otherwise
   it will continue to execute previous logic.

.. line separator

8. ``declarations.class_declaration_t`` has new property - ``aliases``. This is
   a list of all aliases to the class declaration.

.. line separator

9. The message of the exception, which is raised from ``declarations.mdecl_wrapper_t``
   class was improved and now clearly explains what the problem is.

.. line separator

-------------
Version 0.8.5
-------------

1. Added new functionality: "I depend on them". Every declaration can report
   types and declarations it depends on.

2. ``signed char`` and ``char`` are two different types. This bug was fixed and
   now :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` treats them right. Many thanks to Gaetan Lehmann for reporting
   the bug.

3. Declarations, read from GCC-XML generated file, could be saved in cache.

4. New type traits have been added:

   * ``is_bool``

5. Small improvement to algorithm, which extracts ``value_type``
   ( ``mapped_type`` ) from "std" containers.

6. Few aliases to long method name were introduced:

   ================================= ==========================
                Name                           Alias
   ================================= ==========================
    ``scopedef_t.variable``           ``scopedef_t.var``
    ``scopedef_t.variables``          ``scopedef_t.vars``
    ``scopedef_t.member_function``    ``scopedef_t.mem_fun``
    ``scopedef_t.member_functions``   ``scopedef_t.mem_funs``
    ``scopedef_t.free_function``      ``scopedef_t.free_fun``
    ``scopedef_t.free_functions``     ``scopedef_t.free_funs``
   ================================= ==========================

7. Fixing bug related to array size and cache.

-------------
Version 0.8.2
-------------

1. Few small bug fix and unit tests have been introduced on 64 Bit platforms.
   Many thanks to Gottfried Ganssauge! He also help me to discover and fix
   some important bug in ``type_traits.__remove_alias`` function, by introducing
   small example that reproduced the error.

2. Huge speed improvement has been achieved (x10). Allen Bierbaum suggested to
   save and reuse results of different :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` algorithms:

   * ``declarations.remove_alias``
   * ``declarations.full_name``
   * ``declarations.access_type``
   * ``declarations.demangled_name``
   * ``declarations.declaration_path``

3. Interface changes:

  * ``declarations.class_t``:

    + ``set_members`` method was removed

    + ``adopt_declaration`` method was introduced, instead of ``set_members``

  * ``declarations.array_t`` class "set" accessor for size property was added.

  * ``declarations.namespace_t.adopt_declaration`` method was added.

  * ``declarations.variable_t.access_type`` property was added.

4. New type traits have been added:

   * ``is_same_function``

5. Few bug were fixed.

6. Documentation was improved.

-------------
Version 0.8.1
-------------

1. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` has been ported to MacOS X. Many thanks to Darren Garnier!

2. New type traits have been added:

   * ``enum_traits``

   * ``class_traits``

   * ``class_declaration_traits``

   * ``is_std_string``

   * ``is_std_wstring``

   * ``remove_declarated``

   * ``has_public_less``

   * ``has_public_equal``

   * ``has_public_binary_operator``

   * ``smart_pointer_traits``

   * ``list_traits``

   * ``deque_traits``

   * ``queue_traits``

   * ``priority_queue``

   * ``vector_traits``

   * ``stack_traits``

   * ``map_traits``

   * ``multimap_traits``

   * ``hash_map_traits``

   * ``hash_multimap_traits``

   * ``set_traits``

   * ``hash_set_traits``

   * ``multiset_traits``

   * ``hash_multiset_traits``

3. ``enumeration_t`` class interface was changed. Enumeration values are kept
   in a list, instead of a dictionary. ``get_name2value_dict`` will build for
   you dictionary, where key is an enumeration name, and value is an enumeration
   value.

   This has been done in order to provide stable order of enumeration values.

4. Now you can pass operator symbol, as a name to query functions:

  .. code-block:: python

     cls = global_namespace.class_( 'my_class' )
     op = cls.operator( '<' )
     #instead of
     op = cls.operator( symbol='<' )

5. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` improved a lot functionality related to providing feedback to user:

   * every package has its own logger

   * only important user messages are written to ``stdout``

   * user messages are clear

6. Support to Java native types has been added.

7. It is possible to pass an arbitrary string as a parameter to `GCC-XML`_.

8. Native java types has been added to fundamental types.

9. Cache classes implementation was improved.

10. Few bug were fixed.

11. Documentation was improved.

12. ``mdecl_wrapper_t.decls`` property was renamed to  ``declarations``.
    The reason is that the current name ( ``decls`` ) conflicts with the method
    of the same name in the decl interface from ``declarations.scopedef_t`` class.

    So for example:

    .. code-block:: python

      classes = ns.decls("class")
      classes.decls("method")

    This will fail because it finds the attribute decls which is not a callable.

-----------
Version 0.8
-----------

1. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` now has power "select" interface. Read more about this cool feature
   in tutorials.

2. Improved support for template instantiations. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` now take into
   account demangled name of declarations. Please refer to documentation for
   more explanantion.

3. ``dummy_type_t`` - new type in types hierarchy. This is a very useful class
   for code generation projects.

4. New function - ``get_global_namespace``. As you can guess, it will find and
   return reference to global namespace.

5. New functionality in ``type_traits`` - ``has_public_assign``. This function
   will return True, if class has public assign operator.

6. ``declarations.class_t`` has new property - ``aliases``. This is a list of
   all class aliases.

7. Bug fixes.

8. Documentation has been updated/written/improved.

-------------
Version 0.7.1
-------------

**Attention - this going to be last version that is tested with Python 2.3**

1. New fundamental types has been added

   * complex float

   * complex double

   * complex long double

2. **Attention - non backward compatible change**

   ``declarations.filtering.user_defined`` and ``declarations.filtering.by_location``
   implementation has been changed. In previous version of those functions,
   ``decls`` list has been changed in place. This was wrong behavior. Now,
   those functions will return new list, which contains all desired declarations.

3. Few new type traits has been added

   * *type_traits.has_destructor*

   * *type_traits.has_public_destructor*

   * *type_traits.has_public_constructor*

   * *type_traits.is_noncopyable*

4. ``decl_printer_t`` class and ``print_declarations`` function have been added.
   Now you can print in a nice way your declaration tree or part of it.
   Thanks to Allen Bierbaum!

5. New class ``declarations.decl_factory_t`` has been added. This is a default
   factory for all declarations. From now all relevant parser classes takes as
   input instance of this class or ``Null``. In case of ``Null`` instance of
   ``declarations.decl_factory_t`` will be created. Using this class you can
   easily extend functionality provided by built-in declarations.

6. Sometimes, there is a need to find a declaration that match some criteria.
   The was such functionality in :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>`, but it was too limited. This
   release fix the situation. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` adds a set of classes that will help
   you to deal with this problem.

7. New cache - ``parser.directory_cache_t`` has been implemented.
   ``parser.directory_cache_t`` uses individual files stored in a dedicated
   cache directory to store the cached contents.
   Thanks to Matthias Baas!

8. ``parser.file_cache_t`` has been improved a lot.
   Thanks to Allen Bierbaum!

9. New file configuration is available: "cached source file".
   ``parser.project_reader_t`` class will check for existence of `GCC-XML`_
   generated file. If it does not exist it will create one. If it do exist,
   then the parser will use that file.

10. Few helper functions has been added in order to make construction of
    configuration file to be as easy as possible:

    * ``parser.create_text_fc`` - creates file configuration, that contains text
    * ``parser.create_source_fc`` - creates file configuration, that contains
      reference to regular source file
    * ``parser.create_gccxml_fc`` - creates file configuration, that contains
      reference to `GCC-XML`_ generated file
    * ``parser.create_cached_source_fc`` - creates file configuration, that
      contains reference to 2 files: `GCC-XML`_ generated file and regular source
      file

11. Small bug fixes.

12. Documentation. Allen Bierbaum and Matthias Baas contributed so much in this
    area. Almost every public function/class has now documentation string.

13. Logging functionality has been added. :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` creates new logger
    "pygccxml". Now it is possible to see what :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` is doing right now.

14. I am sure I forgot something.


-------------
Version 0.6.9
-------------

1. New functions:

   * *type_traits.is_void_pointer*

   * *type_traits.array_size*

   * *type_traits.array_item_type*

2. Class *declarations.variable_t* has new property - *bit_fields*

3. Now it is possible to specify "undefined" directives using
   *parser.config_t* class.

4. *patch* functionality has been introduced. `GCC-XML`_ generates wrong
   default values for function arguments. *patch* functionality tries to fix
   this.

5. Small bug fixes

-------------
Version 0.6.8
-------------

1. Small bug has been fixed.

-------------
Version 0.6.7
-------------

1. New functions:

   * *type_traits.remove_pointer*

   * *type_traits.base_type*

   * *type_traits.is_convertible*

2. A lot of small bug fixes.

3. Few English mistakes have been fixed.

   .. attention::

      There are 2 none backward compatible changes:

      * class with name **compaund_t** has been renamed to **compound_t**

      * word **pathes** has been replaced with **paths**

4. There are new properties on

   * *declarations.declaration_t.top_parent*

   * *declarations.class_t.recursive_bases* returns all base classes of the
     class

   * *declarations.class_t.recursive_derived* returns all derived classes of
     the class

   * *member_calldef_t.access_type*

5. New type has been introduced: *unknown_t*. There are use cases when
   `GCC-XML`_ does not returns function return type.

6. New implementation of *make_flatten* algorithm using generators.
   By default old implementation will be used.

7. *parser.file_configuration_t* interface has been changed. Now it is able
   to keep: source file, text or `GCC-XML`_ generated file. If you are doing
   something with code that is not changing you'd better use `GCC-XML`_
   generated file as content of the *parser.file_configuration_t*. Save your
   time.

8. There are some cases when `GCC-XML`_ reports *"restricted"*. In this case
   :doc:`pygccxml <../pygccxml>` replaces *"restricted"* with *"volatile"*.


.. _`SourceForge`: http://sourceforge.net/index.php
.. _`GCC-XML`: http://www.gccxml.org
